what's up my smart smart friends I'm
Brendon Hufford have radically changed
my life with SEO the goal of this
project what you're watching right now
the 100 days of SEO is to help you do
the same let's go
[Music]
today in this video we're going to talk
about data-driven design SEO driven
business driven design for designers
let's get into it
all right y'all Brendon Hufford back
here again in my computer I'm so excited
to teach you how to reduce stress and do
better work and improve client
relationships in just 15 minutes
designers raise your hand right now if a
client has ever said I don't understand
why you did this
that's not how I would do it I'm the
target market and I don't like it I'll
know what I like when I see it any usage
of the words chill factor or fun factor
in referring to your designs see also
make it pop make the logo bigger make it
like this other site but not and finally
this isn't what we paid for now I want
you to keep your hand up if you'd like
to never hear those words ever again the
goal of this video in this podcast is to
just really quickly I want you to
understand you're a badass keep that up
I'm gonna teach you how to use Google
Analytics and then three I'm gonna give
you a framework that guarantees success
let me explain
make sure you watch at the end of the
video listen to the end of this podcast
I've got something really special for
you here's one thing I've learned one
thing in my 10 years as a teacher a you
know the business that I built in sold
my Jiu Jitsu apparel review website
nitrogen to apparel company my podcast
that has over 225 thousand downloads my
youtube channel which as of making this
video has over a hundred and twenty-one
thousand views in as the SEO team lead
with studios in my opinion the number
one web design agency in Chicago and
pushing nationally there's one thing
I've learned from all of this and that
is that data is power data is power
especially in your relationships as a
designer now here's here's what I want
to give you today is the 20% of what I
do
that gets you 80% of the results you
don't have to master SEO you don't have
to master Google Analytics you just need
a tiny piece of what I do that's gonna
get you 80% of the way there now why are
we here today number one you're a badass
you're leading a project and what gets
put out in the world is ultimately your
responsibility
second a good manager defines the
circumstances of a project if you're
watching this and you're a project
manager that's you but if you're a
freelance designer you're the designer
and the project manager and a bad
manager responds to the circumstances of
a project you respond to your clients
requests a really good designer a really
good manager defines those requests for
a client number three I want to help you
set the tone the design sets the tone
for an entire project your credibility
starts in that discovery session that
first call that first set of emails I
want to help you set the tone and
finally I want you to be able to go fast
you understand scope creep you
understand that things can get stretched
out into inevitable ends and that's in
everybody's best interest yours and your
clients if your designs get approved as
soon as possible so in less than 15
minutes not in this video this video is
much shorter than 15 minutes but in less
than 15 minutes I want to give you a
just quick 5 to 10 minute process that
you can do that will radically change a
project for you I want to give you an
ace up your sleeve a short little just
bullet point list of what you can hit
that will change the way you do designs
for ever so let's start looking at
Google Analytics the first thing you're
going to look at in Google Analytics is
sessions and users now
why understanding how many sessions
there are on a website and how many
users come to the website is data that
is gonna help you be positioned as an
expert with your client if they know
these numbers they all of a sudden see
you as an equal if they don't know their
numbers they see you as knowing more
than them and that matters and it's not
just saying what the numbers are well I
notice you have six thousand eight
hundred and sixty nine people to your
website so far in May that doesn't
matter what story does it tell what
story do you see when you look at the
ups and the downs of their traffic did
they have a peak one day are things down
another day
have they been falling slowly over the
last six months all of a sudden you have
a story to tell and that is what
positions you as an expert not just
knowing the numbers next up is channels
channels take us from a client thinking
or saying we think to you saying I know
if you're doing discovery right as a
designer or a project manager you're
asking your clients where do you get
most of your traffic from and they look
well we think people just come to our
website directly or nobody actually
types in our URL or they'll say things
like nobody Google's what we do and then
you can tell them actually 50% of your
traffic comes from search so people are
googling stuff all of a sudden it's like
oh okay I hired the right person now
they have confidence in you the
positioning again changes when we pull
up landing pages now this is blurred
because I don't want to show exactly
what these landing pages are but what's
really cool is you can compare new
versus returning it can be so valuable
in informing your design and informing
your copy whether you're working with a
copywriter you have one on your team or
the client is doing copy all of a sudden
that changes now a landing page is not
what we always think of as a landing
page a page design to be landed on these
just happen to be the pages people are
landing on currently meaning the first
page they land on on the website we can
look at average session duration we can
look at bounce rate we can look at
whether these pages are currently
delivering the promise that they're
supposed to
next is content drill down now here's
what I love here that shows bounce rate
we know what bounce is somebody that
leaves the site without taking any
action they land on one page and then
they immediately leave but an exit is
different and exiting
they've gone through more than one page
they've taken more than one action and
then they leave and when we see a big
disparity between a bounce rate and an
exit rate we can get a better
understanding of whether the page again
fulfills its current promise what do we
need to change here what could be
improved when I see things like a really
high bounce rate and a really low exit
rate I can see like well when people get
here directly immediately this isn't
delivering for a cold kind of user of
somebody who just got to the website
isn't familiar with the brand but once
they go through the website and we
direct them here through other pages
then they get it then it's gonna convert
they're not gonna leave so again we can
see things you know when one of these
unhear for instance on the bottom one
the bounce rate is 77 percent but the
exit rate is 80 percent that means
people who are familiar with what's
going on on the website leave more than
people who come in cold that's a concern
that's definitely something we should
look at now I want to just pause for a
second I want to just remind you of this
amazing quote by Mike Montero why are we
talking about this when you don't come
in and you don't position yourself as an
expert this is what happens Mike says
dear sweet Lord in heaven above and all
his angels you just gave away the farm
they're no longer viewing you as an
expert you are no longer their equal in
expertise you are no longer the person
they feel comfortable enough writing a
check to even if they don't realize it
all of these things just happened that's
what happens when you don't come into a
project with data you become a design
monkey a code monkey a word monkey
you're just there to do to execute on
their vision and you are not the expert
anymore so let's get back to keeping you
in the expert seat next is looking at
their conversions is their website
helping them right now what does it do
for them right now
I've had some websites where I've seen
that the the number one converting thing
was a on mobile people would click the
phone number to call them and then I've
seen a designer remove the phone number
because they said it was confusing they
never checked the conversions to see
what was currently working and they
removed the best point of conversion on
the mobile version of
website it's so important to know what's
working for them right now and what
isn't next up we're gonna take a look at
mobile versus desktop again this is
clients saying nobody looks us up on
their phone oh really they don't we
don't need to prioritize a mobile first
or other people be like you know we're
actually we're definitely need to have a
mobile first design they think they do
and you can say actually a certain
percentage of your traffic comes from
desktop also and I love I love just the
idea of prioritizing one or the other do
we want to make a responsive website of
course but should we really put our time
into the mobile version or the desktop
version if we don't have time or budget
to do both and that brings us to devices
I love this to speed up QA if you work
at an agency or even if you're just a
freelancer a lot of times you'll have
clients that are like well this doesn't
look right on my iPad it doesn't look
right on my phone all right now all of a
sudden even say yeah I know that doesn't
look right for you but for 99 percent of
your users that are on Apple iPhones and
iPads like it's gonna look great things
like that again you can speak to this
and you can retain your expertise next
up is Geographic so this is under geo in
analytics and I love to compare new
versus returning in this but also just
just helpful the show your client like
hey I know you're making a national push
I know you're trying to get out of just
being in California and it looks like
your other states that are getting a lot
of traffic are in New York Texas
Nebraska maybe we can find ways to speak
to that on a landing page we can find
ways to speak to that in the design and
then last up is demographics
demographics looked like let's be honest
some of this is BS the gender is binary
so it doesn't include a lot of people
the age is also totally arbitrary I
personally just turned 35 and that means
on this graph that I've moved from one
giant section to the next that's absurd
right like why are these built out the
way they are however it can be useful in
considering and defending the messaging
in the imagery you use on the website
why do we want to do this number one
it's your damn room like you have to own
your conversations with your clients if
you don't own the room they will if
there's a vacuum they're gonna step into
it and they're gonna take over the
their project and honestly that's not
what's best for them you're the expert
you should be running things it's also
about the freaking user you're making
something for humans if it's not
accessible if it's not built for the
people who are actually using it of
which accessibility is only one part
like you have to care about the humans
because what you're putting out in the
world is your responsibility no matter
if you think your website project
matters to the world or not I'm gonna
tell you right now it does it matters to
people and when we make things better
for people we all do better and finally
this puts the client at ease again
nothing puts a client at ease like
having an expert in the driver's seat
and that expert should be you now
here's what I told you to watch till the
end of the video because here's what I
got for you this is the thing I learned
when I was a teacher now this is
actually my actually my ID from when I
was an assistant principal in 2013 to
2014 believe it or not before I doubled
down and made my whole career about SEO
I learned this thing called the gradual
release of responsibility and that's a
silly kind of weighty education term so
I'm gonna call this the three phases of
Awesome it's an I do a we doin a you do
so here's what I got for you
what you just watched here in the video
what you're watching listening to right
now is the I do you saw me walk through
those but here's what I want to do I
want to help you I want to do a we do
before I just set you into the world to
say go figure out how to use Google
Analytics in your design projects here's
what I'm gonna offer you if you comment
below on this YouTube video if you're
listening on the podcast come over to
the YouTube video check it out links in
the description comment below with your
website and I will help you figure some
of this out
I will arm you or even even if you if
you want to throw it out there comment
below with a client website comment
below with something you're working on
so one of the things we talked about in
this video that you're struggling with
telling a story around to a client and I
will help you and that takes the I do
and the we do and you'll be able to
scroll down in the comments below like
maybe you're not the first 10 people to
comment and I'm not gonna be able to
help you otherwise I'm only gonna help
the first 10 people that comment on this
video check out theirs see what I help
them with and then you're able to go out
in the world and do the you do if you
want
learn more about SEO take the free 30
day one ranking away challenge at 100
days of seo.com if you're a designer and
you need hosting for your clients
websites or your own websites check out
100 days of SEO calm / flywheel flywheel
is where I host all of my most important
websites I really appreciate you
watching I hope this is helpful don't
forget to comment below and I will
personally be there to answer your
comments and help you out I've been
Brendon Hufford that's have been diesel
don't forget to work hard be nice people
and don't get too lost trying to create
something that matters